+++
title = "Five Years of Software Development"
descr = "Reflection and lessons learned after the first five years of my career."
rss = "Reflecting on my career thus far."
date = Date(2021, 1, 16)
hascode = false
tags = ["career"]
+++

{{ posttags }}

# Five Years of Software Development

\toc

## Foot in the Door

January 2016 marked the dawn of a new age. I experienced some difficulty
breaking into the job market, but I was steadfast in my pursuit to find a
workplace where my education could be put to use. Armed with a math degree and
zero technical experience, I somehow landed a job in the IT department of a
major automotive OEM. Here I am five years later! So this feels like the
perfect time to reflect on my journey so far.

## The Beginning

I started in a business intelligence group. My team was assembled to gather,
aggregate and report key performance indicators for dealerships across
international markets. This role introduced me to some fundamentals, such as
managing relational databases, data modeling, ETL (short for Extract /
Transform / Load), and face-to-face interaction with business partners. That
last skill being perhaps the most important and would serve me well in the
future. However, what I remember most about this role is the team. We were
small but ambitious. We moved fast, worked hard, trusted each other and we
accomplished our goals.

Later I worked in a customer relationship management (or CRM) group. The team
was tasked to define, test and generate manifests for marketing campaigns
across multiple media channels (letter, email, phone). In this new area, I had
to stay up-to-date on all data privacy laws and best practices. Additionally, I
improved upon my data management skills such as data cleansing, munging and
wrangling. I also got my first taste of Linux, and admittedly, I didn't see the
big deal - that would come later. Personally, I had to learn to operate more
like an individual contributor. This was challenging at times, but in the end
helped me to become a more independent developer.

## The Big Show

After two years I wanted a change. The idea was to combine my newfound
technical skills with my interests in mathematics. Not knowing exactly what I
was looking for, I began to search throughout the company. Finally, I found the
High Performance Compute (HPC) & Open-Source Software Application Development
Team. I only knew what a couple of those words meant, but I was excited about
the opportunity and I took it!

The objective - create innovative solutions for Computer Aided Engineering
(CAE) using free and open-source software (FOSS). This grew into many desktop,
web, monitoring and service applications. In the end, I was involved in
everything from data transfers to data serialization, file management to memory
management, workflow curation to job monitoring, user-experience to remote
post-processing, and managing business partner coordination to individually
leading feature development. I grew a tremendous amount as a developer, leader
and person in a short time due to the amazing amount of talent and
determination on the team (and a special shout-out to my boss who believes in
me and fuels my curiosity).

Three plus years on this team gave me skills I never knew existed. It was a
long journey. I had to come to work every day ready to learn. Over time and
after asking countless questions, I became the one with the answers. Not only
that, but I started to take on personal projects to test out newly encountered
technology. I was coming into my own personally and professionally.

## Reflection

A lot happened. So what did I learn? I entered the work force a naive young
man.  I had a true desire to work hard and improve my company. However, things
did not prove to be that simple, and I struggled with some aspects of working
in such a large company. Thankfully, I was able to "_keep the faith_" as my
manager would say, and I kept searching for a team where my skills and passions
could shine - and one day that is exactly what happened!

I carved out a home in that crazy big machine. I gave a lot of long hours and
hard work, and in return the company helped me grow in unexpected ways. Here I
am now, a little less young and naive. As I reflect it's obvious that my
greatest contribution to any of the efforts above was not my knowledge of
Calculus, Statistics, or Number Theory. The greatest value I can add comes from
my ability and desire to communicate ideas. The ability to communicate and
understand complex situations - be it in a dataset or a team dynamic - has
helped me succeed in a variety of ways. More importantly, this willingness to
listen, and share (usually in that order) has made my team members _want_ to
work with me.

That is the most important thing I could learn in my first five years in
software development.  I'm incredibly grateful, and excited to continue my
work.
